20260601 Class Note

Resources: Matplotlib Cheatsheets
https://s3.amazonaws.com/assets.datacamp.com/blog_assets/Python_Matplotlib_Cheat_Sheet.pdf
https://github.com/matplotlib/cheatsheets (with beginner, intermediate, and general tips versions)
We havenʼt covered most of whatʼs on the cheatsheets yet, but keep them for your reference!

20260603 Class Note

Three important qualities of data visualization:
Is the visualization pleasing to look at? → Aesthetic
Does the visualization accurately and honestly present data? → Substantive
Can we understand what message the maker of the visualization is attempting to convey? → Perceptual

Effective visualization depends on intented purpose, audience, and medium.

20260608 Class Note

Reproducibility is ethical and practical.

Comment the code with # or markdown in Jupiter notebook.
Comments include: what has been tried, different versions, help with future or others' understanding

FAIR principles: findability, accessibility, interoperability, reusability
Reproducibility and reusability are complementary
Reproducibility (same input data) vs replicability (across studies)

20260610 Class Note

‘Flattening the Curve’ Activity: In what ways is this data visualization inaccessible, and to whom?
1. There is no quantification or tick marks on the x-axis; whether this level of detail is necessary may depend on the target audience.
2. Highlighting in red may not be accessible to individuals with red color vision deficiency.
3. The grey shading of the peak is too subtle, making it difficult to distinguish differences.
4. The text is not accessible to screen readers.

So how do we incorporate these accessibility goals into our data visualization practices? 
- Mark size, colors, brightness and contrast, text (including labels, legends, font, typeface, spacing)

To ensure that our data visualizations are accessible to people using a screen reader or unable to see the image, we include alternate text (alt-text)

Accessibility: Cross-browser functionality, Cost (Open Access or Creative Commons licenses)

20260615 Class Note

Data visualization for advocacy
Three elements of persuasion: rational appeal, moral appeal, and emotional appeal

Ship Activity
Rational appeal: using quantitive data/specific number to present how people were stored in the ship.
Moral appeal: schematic crouched movement to highlight inhuman conditions.
Emotional appeal: invoke anger and sympathy.

Two functions of data visualization for advocacy:
Presentation - describing and depicting the facts
Representation - subjectively depicting ideas using metaphor, analogy, and allegory

Activity: Static vs. dynamic data visualization (also included in the .ipynb file markdown)
left: more accurate to compare, simple bar plot, easier to undertand
right interactive graph: larger datasets, allow audience to explore themselves

Dynamic data visualizations prons:
Can provide information that cannot be obtained from static charts
Are useful for viewing individual-level data
Allow audiences to explore the data in-depth, supporting transparency and reproducibility
Can increase interest and engagement in research outputs

Dynamic data visualizations cons:
Make it more challenging to tell a single clear story or communicate a clear message
Can be confusing or overwhelming for audiences
Present access and sharing challenges (e.g. an image can be viewed in print, online, on mobile, but a dynamic viz might need to be hosted on a particular platform or software)

Elements of dynamic data visualizations:
Spatial elements → Position and quantity (e.g. number of data points on a plot, scales of axes)
Retinal elements → Size, brightness, rotation, patterning, shape, and colour

Types of changes:
Identity-preserving
- Maintain associations between visual elements and underlying data
- Some part of a representation stays constant (e.g., keeping the relative position of data points constant)
- Important for comparing across time/snapshots
Transitional
- Maintain some associations, and limit changes to known values
- New elements may be added or changed
- Balance flexibility with the ability to compare over short periods of time/small changes between snapshots
Immediate
- Generally do not preserve associations
- Create and delete elements, alter scales, remap variables every time a new ‘snapshot’ is created
- Does not allow for comparison across time/snapshots

Activity continued:
no clear boundary, transitional when among different keywords, immediate because x and y axis can change
Saptial changes
If redesign, reordering the y-axis when comparing different words


